chore(release): final release v0.59.0 (#12149)
radius-project/radius: docs/release-notes/v0.59.0.md

## Announcing Radius v0.59.0

Today we're happy to announce the release of Radius v0.59.0. Check out the [highlights](#highlights) below, along with the [full changelog](#full-changelog) for more details.

We would like to extend our thanks to all contributors who helped make this release possible!

## Intro to Radius

If you're new to Radius, check out our website, [radapp.io](https://radapp.io), for more information. Also visit our [getting started guide](https://docs.radapp.io/getting-started/) to learn how to install Radius and create your first app.

## Highlights

### Radius Resource Types for compute platform extensibility
>

> > Note: the new Radius.Core Resource Types are actively under development and only available now as an early preview.

Reviewer: ```suggestion

> Note: the new `Radius.Core/*` Resource Types are actively under development and only available now as an early and sparsely documented preview. You may try the features by using the `--preview` flag in relevant CLI commands, please refer to the [rad CLI reference](https://docs.radapp.io/reference/cli/) for more details.
```

Author: updated

> > Note: the new `Radius.Core/*` Resource Types are actively under development and only available now as an early and sparsely documented preview. You may try the features by using the `--preview` flag in relevant CLI commands, please refer to the [rad CLI reference] for more details.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> Note: the new `Radius.Core/*` Resource Types are actively under development and only available now as an early and sparsely documented preview. You may try the features by using the `--preview` flag in relevant CLI commands, please refer to the [rad CLI reference](https://docs.radapp.io/reference/cli/) for more details.
```

#### CLI support for the new Radius.Core resource types
Radius is introducing a new set of resource types under the `Radius.Core` namespace (e.g., `Radius.Core/applications`, `Radius.Core/environments`) that will eventually replace the existing `Applications.Core` types. These new types are available via the `v20250801preview` API surface and represent the next generation of Radius's resource model.

> Previously, CLI commands like `rad app list` and `rad app graph` only worked with the older `Applications.Core/applications` type — meaning applications deployed using the new `Radius.Core/applications` type were invisible to the CLI. The new `--preview` flag fixes this by directing commands to operate against `Radius.Core` resources:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Currently, CLI commands like `rad app list` and `rad app graph` operate on the existing `Applications.Core/applications` type, meaning that applications deployed using the new `Radius.Core/applications` type were invisible to the CLI. The added `--preview` flag directs commands to operate against `Radius.Core` resources:
```

- **`rad app graph --preview` and `rad app status --preview`** — View the application graph and check status for apps deployed as `Radius.Core/applications`. ([#11983](https://github.com/radius-project/radius/pull/11983))
- **`rad workspace create --preview`** — Create workspaces that use `Radius.Core/environments`, so you can pair them with the new resource types. ([#11905](https://github.com/radius-project/radius/pull/11905))

#### Kubernetes namespace for Radius.Core environments

> Previously, environments created with the `Application.Core/environments` created a new Kubernetes namespace on behalf of the user. We found that this approach was not representative of enterprise scenarios where namespace creation is managed by the cluster admins. New `Radius.Core environments` require you to explicitly pass the Kubernetes namespace you want to use for application deployments, defaulting it to `"default"`if none is specified.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Previously, environments created with the `Application.Core/environments` created a new Kubernetes namespace on behalf of the user. We found that this approach was not representative of enterprise scenarios where namespace creation is managed by the cluster admins. New `Radius.Core/environments` require you to explicitly pass the Kubernetes namespace you want to use for application deployments, falling back to `'default'` if none is specified.
```

Author: updated

#### Default Contour Gateway for route recipes
Radius now sets up Gateway API infrastructure automatically when Contour is installed. `rad install kubernetes` creates a shared `GatewayClass/contour` and `Gateway/radius` in `radius-system`, and the default `Radius.Compute/routes` recipe is pre-configured to attach route resources to this managed Gateway. Applications no longer need to define their own gateway resource in the default path.

#### Deprecation warning for `rad run` with extensible environments

> The `rad run` command is not supported for compute runtimes configured using the extensible `Radius.Core/environments` type and is planned for deprecation in a future release. Please manually set up port forwarding and log streaming based on the specific compute runtime or platform you have configured in your Environment.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `rad run` command is not supported for environments configured with the new extensible `Radius.Core/environments` model and is planned for deprecation. `rad run` depends on Kubernetes-specific behaviors (including log streaming and port forwarding), making it incompatible with the platform-agnostic design of the new architecture, where compute runtimes can extend beyond Kubernetes. Instead, use `rad deploy` and rely on the native tooling of your chosen compute platform to access logs and establish connectivity.
```

## Announcing Radius v0.59.0

Today we're happy to announce the release of Radius v0.59.0. Check out the [highlights](#highlights) below, along with the [full changelog](#full-changelog) for more details.

We would like to extend our thanks to all the [new](#new-contributors) and existing contributors who helped make this release possible!

## Intro to Radius

If you're new to Radius, check out our website, [radapp.io](https://radapp.io), for more information. Also visit our [getting started guide](https://docs.radapp.io/getting-started/) to learn how to install Radius and create your first app.

> ## Highlights

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
## Highlights

### Radius Resource Types for compute platform extensibility
>
> Note: the new Radius.Core Resource Types are actively under development and only available now as an early preview.

#### CLI support for the new Radius.Core resource types

Radius is introducing a new set of resource types under the `Radius.Core` namespace (e.g., `Radius.Core/applications`, `Radius.Core/environments`) that will eventually replace the existing `Applications.Core` types. These new types are available via the `v20250801preview` API surface and represent the next generation of Radius's resource model.

Previously, CLI commands like `rad app list` and `rad app graph` only worked with the older `Applications.Core/applications` type — meaning applications deployed using the new `Radius.Core/applications` type were invisible to the CLI. The new `--preview` flag fixes this by directing commands to operate against `Radius.Core` resources:

- **`rad app graph --preview` and `rad app status --preview`** — View the application graph and check status for apps deployed as `Radius.Core/applications`. ([#11983](https://github.com/radius-project/radius/pull/11983))
- **`rad workspace create --preview`** — Create workspaces that use `Radius.Core/environments`, so you can pair them with the new resource types. ([#11905](https://github.com/radius-project/radius/pull/11905))

#### Kubernetes namespace for Radius.Core environments

Previously, environments created with the `Application.Core/environments` created a new Kubernetes namespace on behalf of the user. We found that this approach was not representative of enterprise scenarios where namespace creation is managed by the cluster admins. New `Radius.Core environments` require you to explicitly pass the Kubernetes namespace you want to use for application deployments, defaulting it to `"default"`if none is specified.

#### Default Contour Gateway for route recipes

Radius now sets up Gateway API infrastructure automatically when Contour is installed. `rad install kubernetes` creates a shared `GatewayClass/contour` and `Gateway/radius` in `radius-system`, and the default `Radius.Compute/routes` recipe is pre-configured to attach route resources to this managed Gateway. Applications no longer need to define their own gateway resource in the default path.

#### Deprecation warning for `rad run` with extensible environments

The `rad run` command is not supported for compute runtimes configured using the extensible `Radius.Core/environments` type and is planned for deprecation in a future release. Please manually set up port forwarding and log streaming based on the specific compute runtime or platform you have configured in your Environment.

### Bug fixes

- **Fixed Helm chart Terraform binary path mismatch**: The pre-mounted Terraform binary path in the Helm chart didn't match what the runtime expected, causing Radius to silently re-download Terraform from `releases.hashicorp.com` on every cold start. Now the paths are aligned and the pre-mounted binary is used correctly.
- **Fixed recipe pack OCI tags**: Core resource type recipes now use the full semantic version (e.g., `0.58.0`) for OCI tags instead of the version channel (e.g., `0.40`), aligning with the kube-recipes publishing pipeline.
- **Aligned `rad env create` and `rad env update` flags**: `rad env create` now supports cloud provider flags (`--azure-subscription-id`, `--aws-region`, etc.) and `rad env update` now supports `--namespace`, unifying the configuration options across both commands.
- **Honor `x-ms-client-flatten` in Bicep type generator**: The Bicep type generator now flattens the ARM `.properties.` envelope, so users write `container.container.image` instead of `container.properties.container.image` in their Bicep templates.
```

Author: updated

> ## Breaking changes

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```
